Well, I think the time I first started thinking
about oceanography was before there was any
really formal training, you might say, or
curriculum or degrees in oceanography. It wasn't
until, oh, what, the last 20 years, something like
that, that there is a formal training curriculum
in oceanography, degree-granting, graduate
degree-granting, and, of course, outfits like
Scripps was one of the first ones. As a matter of
fact, right now, today, of the 10 leading, or 12,
depends on how you want to argue it, leading
oceanographic institutions in the country,
There's only one director who actually has a
formal degree in oceanography, and that's Johnny
Knauss up in Rhode Island. All the other directors
have come through it by not necessarily a
circuitous route, from the outside, so to speak,
because I mentioned the lack of formal training in
oceanography, to mouth anything until about 20
years ago, in one of the disciplines that comprise
the sub-disciplines of oceanography.
Oceanography isn't a separate discipline like
geology or chemistry or biology, but it's the use
of all those to solve problems in the environment
of the ocean. And that's one reason why we don't
have an undergraduate degree in oceanography.
And again, the leading oceanographic
institution with one exception, the University
of Washington, doesn't have an undergraduate
degree. Because you have to be first grounded in
some basic science and certain peripheral
subjects along with it before you can really begin
to do a job professionally in oceanography. So in
my case, I came through the geologist geophysical
route. For example, Paul Fein out with Hall as a
chemist, Nirenberg, Scripps as a physicist. And
right on down the line, Bradtray out at Washington
is a, let's see, he's a chemist. And John Byrne at
Oregon State is a geologist. George Bullard, who
wrote a hat to Hawaii, is also a geophysicist. So
this is the way the situation basically exists.
And so in answer to your question, which may seem to
be a long way around the mulberry bush, is that I
came to oceanography through the virtue of
geology and geophysics because Once having
applied this information on land, obviously, in
order to solve some of the problems, you had to turn
to the sea, particularly in such major areas as
crustal evolution, drifting continents, and
whatnot, and the origin of continents and ocean
basins. But the geologists on land can't solve
these problems because the answers are skewed by
thousands and, in some cases, tens of thousands of
feet of sediment. And if it weren't for the
information of the geological and geophysical
ocean arcs that had gotten at sea, we never would
have had the information we have now toward
solving the earlier problems I mentioned. Well,
when did these problems first occur to you? Do you
remember? Was it when you were working at
Standard, or was it prior to that? No, these
problems occurred to me actually when I was
working for my graduate degree at Princeton,
because my major professor there, Dr. Harry Hess,
had already started going to sea to start solving
some of these problems using Vainik Mayonnaise's
pendulums and a submarine and paddling around the
Caribbean and whatnot. And George Willard, who
had just graduated from Princeton when I first
came, and Maurice Ewing were making studies off
the New Jersey coast in the water. Did you
participate in these? No, I didn't participate.
No. before I came doing this work. And just by the
time I came, he left and went up to withhold. And so
when the war came along, with all the practical
problems that were thrown in the laps of the
oceanographers at Woods Hole to solve. I was soon
asked to join the staff, so I did most of my war work
at Woods Hole in the oceanographic factors
affecting sound ranging in the sea, the Navy
problems, anti-submarine, pro-submarine
warfare. So that's how I wound up at Woods Hole.
Now, you were an instructor at Princeton from 38 to
42. This overlaps with private business, it
seemed to me. You were also listed at Standard Oil
at the same time. Is that correct? Well, I was a
consultant at Standard Oil at that time. What
happened was I worked for Standard Oil in New
Jersey and New York before I went to Princeton. And
then I decided to go on and get my PhD. And so they
supported me with consulting work part of the
time, although I was on a fellowship at Princeton.
So I can see where the question arises. 42, you go to
the Navy. Right. And then most of your work you do
for the Navy is done at Woods Hole. Yeah. Although I
did start out doing some work for the Navy in Rhode
Island in connection with the gousing ships,
which is also geophysics, protecting the ships
from magnetic mines that were planted in the
water. by wrapping coils of copper around the ship
and putting current through it to set up a field
equal in magnitude and opposite in direction to
that of the ship's field. So when the ship went over
a magnetic mine, the mine, there was no magnetic
field force in the ship trigger and set off the
mine, or the triggering mechanism. And that
problem was solved pretty rapidly, and it went
from there to Woods Hole on the submarine work.
Does that explain, then, your interest in
magnetism? Yeah. Did you come to that as a
petroleum engineer, or was this... Geophysical.
Geophysical. Okay. And then you were asked to
apply that then in the Navy, a specific problem you
were assigned to solve in the Navy. Okay. So you
were involved in the anti-submarine work? Yeah,
at Woods Hole and in the, you might say,
geomagnetism the first couple years at Rhode
Island. Did you meet Spilhaus involving the
anti-submarine work? No, I didn't meet Spilhaus
until, oh golly, about 1948 or 49. Spillhouse had
left Woods Hole at the time when I came in. It was
about 41, I think. When you leave the Navy in 45 and
then return to Woods Hole?
No, chronologically, as I recall, I left the Navy
in 42 and went to Woods Hole in 42 to 45. And then at
the end of 45, I went back to work for Standard &
Jersey and won the subsidiaries, in this case
Humboldt. What sort of work was going on at Woods
Hole between 1942 and 1945? Was it primarily work
involving the war effort? Yeah, not only in
connection with anti-submarine, pro-submarine
warfare, but
for underwater photography, looking for wrecks
and sunken enemy submarines to get a better idea of
what they looked like. And then depth charges,
more chemistry and more efficient ways of using
depth charges. There was a whole gamut of things.
More passive things is developing anti-fouling
paints so that the ships wouldn't have to be
painted as often and could go through the water
fast. Oh, just a jillion things. But they were, as
you say, all directed toward pragmatic war
problems that needed to be solved. Actually,
before the war, Woods Hole did not operate all year
round. They just had funds to operate in the
summertime. And it wasn't until the war came along
that they got funding from the Navy and the Army and
the Air Force and whatnot that they operated on
12-month days. Did Woods Hole always have some
sort of a contact with the Ivy League? We're struck
more often than not how many people are brought in
from the geophysics and from various places to
work at Woods Hole as senior researchers, so to
speak. Of course, there again, the geographical
position tend toward that direction. And they
were close to, say, the Ivy League. And Harvard had
a good representation, even in the days of
summertime, of climate only. And
Columbus-Island was in Harvard on the faculty. In
fact, most of the people that were on the Harvard
faculty, a lot of this spread out into Princeton
and some of the other, the bulk of it was One of the
first directors, Bigelow, was a Harvard man, and
then Islin was the second. Actually, Woods Hole
didn't become a degree-granting institution
until about, well, more than the last ten years.
Did you sell any oceanographic vessels out of
Woods Hole? I read an article of yours where you
suggested or you describe the importance of these
vessels. Do you have any comments you'd like to
make on these? The Thompson?
I'm sailed on the Thompson. No, no, not sailed on
them. I said that you made comments about how you
thought these were innovations in oceanographic
research.
This is a two-way street. I'm minding something.
The Thompson is a relatively new agar-type vessel
that's been floating around now for about 89
years.
And it isn't particularly innovative. Well, what
would be its exact job? You say that these vessels
are probably now designed to do specialized work
in oceanography rather than general work, I
suppose, in comparison with the Challenger and
the type of mission. Yeah, no. The Thompson is
doing pretty much the same as the Challenger. It
belongs to the Navy, but it's on bailment to
Scripps. It's one of an Agor class, the Thompson
and Scripps, and we've got a similar one up in the
University of Washington. That's not the
Washington itself, is it? No, it's the other way
around. It's very confusing. Two Agors, the names
of them. One is named, you'd think it's
Washington, but it belongs to Scripps, and the
Thompson belongs to... University
of Washington. But anyway, those are minor
points. I don't remember saying anything about
the Thompson or the Washington or the Agos in
general. I did write an article once in connection
with the new type of vessels that the Navy has now,
the Gyre and the Moana Wave out of Hawaii, which
were an outgrowth of a special type of vessel that
we designed when I was a TI to do work at sea in the
Navy. I think that's what it is. This one over here
is one of the parts in this class that we designed at
Texas Instruments and used for contract work with
the Navy and with the oil companies and whatnot.
That's what I'm trying to lead into, actually, is
while at TI, which is jumping ahead of our story,
what sort of innovations did you work in in
oceanography at TI? Well, for one thing, the
design of a vessel that gave more flexibility to a
particular type of mission as a function of its
length. In other words, what we have now in the
gyre, we have a series of vans of different that are
designed for particular sub-disciplines of
oceanography, like chemical oceanography, and
theological, and physical, and so on. And so by
having a lot of after-deck on a ship available to
put these specialized vans on, you can get more
laboratory space for a particular mission of some
certain type than you could if you tried to have the
same lab space for the four disciplines on one
ship. It would be like the French then. I think
that's one of the things we worked on, along with
Captain Rowe, when I was a TI. Hank Rowe, who was a
retired captain of the Navy, worked with me very
closely. In fact, when I came here and the Navy
decided to build the type of vessel we have now, the
Jarrah type, that he continued his work with them
and with ourselves as a consultant on it. So Hank
Rowe is the one who really worked out the details
and made it gritty with this new type of vessel.
Would you explain exactly how it would work? I take
it you put compartments on for... Yeah, the ship
has basic laboratory space that's used by all the
disciplines, like electronics lab. for
electronic information and navigation and so on.
Then a wet lab. But then, from there on out, it's
just a steel deck, except for winches and things
like that. And if a cruise, the emphasis is
supposed to be on chemical oceanography, well,
then the van-type labs that you put on board are all
outfitted, especially for chemistry, if it's
biology, for biology. And that way, you can get
more for your money, so to speak, on this
particular type of... mission than if you just had
a ship that had cubby holes for this branch and that
branch. Of course, it doesn't have to be
restricted entirely to one sub-discipline. You
have two sub-disciplines. What was your role in
this design? Was it more as a researcher who would
know what kinds of things you would need, giving
ideas as to what compartments you might want and
leaving it up to them to design how it was going to
be? Exactly, yeah. I mean, I make no pretense of
being a naval architect or anything. The ship
design and whatnot was left to that type of person,
but I think you put it pretty well as to what my role
was in it. The advantages of this type of
flexibility. So from experience, you were
telling them what you needed and then let them work
out the detail of how it was put together. Right.
For example, I never thought of increasing the
freeboard 18 inches by putting gratings over the
main deck, putting a false deck over it, which
achieved the advantage of giving you more
freeboard. And yet at the same time, you could also
run cables and piping connections without
tripping over them. I mean, things like that Roe
thought of, I think. What's a freeboard? That's
the distance from the deck to the water line. And
that's another advantage of this type of ship as
compared, say, to the Russian ships. They have
such a high free port. It's more luxurious in the
standpoint of having more room for recreation and
whatnot. It doesn't roll as much. You can be away
from port longer. But they take things that look
like a cruise ship on their oceanographic
vessels. And so you're standing 40 or 50 feet or
more above the water trying to handle equipment
and instruments and whatnot. On the other hand, if
you've been in the sea on a gyre, you'll have the
same complaint that other people have, which is
you get your feet wet all the time. There's no happy
medium between the two. Well, that's something
that Spilhaus, I believe, said was important for
an oceanographer. Yeah. To do at least several
times. I wonder whether he meant it literally or
briefly. Did you spend much time on these
oceanographic vessels while you were at TI or
before? Yeah, in order to only test out these ideas
that we had, but more or less in a supervisory
capacity.
What vessels did you sail on in particular? Well,
the Atlantic seal and the Arctic seal. the ones I
spent most of the time on. Is there any description
you'd like to make of the cruises? Not really. I
mean, they're a regular routine type of
oceanographic cruises whose mission varied from
gathering geological and geophysical
sub-bottom information to, in the case of some of
the Navy work, was classified. Can't talk about
that too much, although some of the Navy work
wasn't classified. to gain information about the
sea and beneath the sea. Again, to solve specific
problems. Ed, we have you at a geophysicist at
Humble Oil between 45 and 48. And what we'd like to
know are two things involving that. First of all,
were you involved in development of seaward
planning for ESSO?
Yeah, in two ways. One, in connection with the
amount of area offshore that might lend itself to
potential oil problems. And then some of the
problems that you would get into in connection
with getting oil from and producing oil from once
you found the oil and dealing with problems. But
there again, it is a question of bouncing back and
forth. I started out in geology and geophysics at
Princeton, and then I applied those principles to
acoustics to solving problems with Woods Hole in
connection with the war, and then, of course, the
first part in connection with magnetic mines. And
then oceanography. Frankly, there was no market
for oceanographers, per se, at that time. So I fell
back on my original training in geology and
geophysics and went back to work for Humble, first
as a research geophysicist. And then when they
started getting interested in going to the Gulf
area and getting their feet wet, as Spilly would
say, they looked around for someone who knew
something about oceanography, and Humble being a
pretty big company, didn't realize they had the
closest thing in oceanography at that time
already within their group. And so they went to
Woods Hole to try to hire somebody, and Woods Hole
told them, well, they had a pretty good
oceanographer right on their staff. So then he
came to me and asked me to set up an oceanographic
section, which is that next period there. Which is
1945, 49 to 54. Yeah. Right. Well, we noticed that
in 1949 and 1950, you presented both your first
paper and began to publish. Does that explain...
Your upward mobility, or is it in terms of
Humboldt? Yeah. I think the first thing I did for
Humboldt, I mean, one of the first things I did for
Humboldt that was published was that
bibliography of marine geology and geophysics. I
went back to Woods Hole for a summer and spent the
whole summer in the library putting it together.
And then we also figured out from management to say
that what the problems were going offshore in the
provinces, potential provinces, and where the
potential provinces were. And then to take the
geophysical instruments that have been
developed for land work, like the gravimeter and
magnetometer, and adapt them to making
observations at sea under continuous activity, I
mean, in continuous motion. and not only a
standard gravity meter and magnetics, but also
electrical methods for looking for salt domes. I
guess I happen to have pictures here of the early
Humboldt fleet. a boat converted to making
surveys using an electromagnetic field of the
Earth to find the salt dome because of the big
difference in electromagnetic characteristics
between the salt dome and the surrounding
sediments. So it's just a question of applying
basic principles of geology and geophysics to
marine modifications who are necessary in order
to operate in a marine environment. These are some
of the early Humboldt ships, as you probably
recognize them. They're straight subchases that
were used during the Navy for
anti-submarine warfare work. And then there was
surplus when the war was over. And those were the
first things that the oil companies and the
service companies latched on to buy. And here's
one you can see. Gravity meter on the thing. Great
big old bulky thing that was put over the side of the
ship. and lower down to the bottom to make a
reading. When I first came with Humble, they
actually had a diving bell that they put this poor
guy in with a gravity meter and then clamped the top
on and lowered him over the side of the ship. Well,
it wasn't a ship, in this case, a subchaser. And of
course, if the sea were running at all, any sort of
waves, well, he was very reluctant to go down and
make a gravity measurement. And I noticed there
was never any argument between the supervisor and
the guy, because the instrument man would
probably say, well, if you think it's so hot, well,
you go down yourself. This is a very crude way of
first starting out, taking an actual meter that
was designed for making observations on land,
putting it in the lap of a guy and putting him in a tin
can, putting it on down, putting him on the bottom.
Then the next step was the one that you see on here,
where they designed a gravity meter that could be
read remotely on the bottom. And finally, today,
the evolutionary history of it is where you have
gravity meters that are put on ships, and instead
of making observations point to point the way the
man and the bell would be, or the that type of
gravity meter on that ship there. We can get a
readout on the ship chart as we go along. Was Humble
one of the first companies to start heading for the
sea and doing this research? Yeah, Humble and
Mobile were probably the first. Actually, Mobile
was the first one. If the truth were known, and at
this point it's no longer classified, none of the
companies want to go to sea because they didn't
have any experience in it and whatnot. But once one
company went to sea, well, the
self-preservation, all the others had to do too
for fear that this one company would get to jump on
all the goodies out there. So one group after
another went to sea. But Humble was the first
company to have actually designated an
oceanographer and an oceanographic section.
Shell was the second one. And then a lot of the
others just contracted their work out to
consulting companies that needed oceanographic
work. Well, once the exploration phase and
transition was made, it turned out that Humboldt
felt that probably I could do more good in the
production, producing activities. And in other
words, what sort of wave forces would act upon
these offshore platforms that they were going to
stick in the water to drill off and produce from, if
they hadn't had any experience before. and
problems of following organisms on the platform.
So it was a whole new area. And that's when I first
got involved with Professor Reed. I was chairman
of an API committee, American Petroleum
Institute Committee, on getting together from
the oil companies their design criteria for
offshore platforms with regard to wave forces on
them and whatnot. He participated in that
symposium that we had at that time. Now, when was
this? That was about the middle 50s. About the
middle 50s, while you were still director of the
oceanography section? Yeah. One of the things
that really slowed it up was the Truman
proclamation and the leasing restrictions that
he put on. The company didn't know whether their
leases would be valid or not, so they held off for a
while. oceanography, you might say commercial
oceanography in the oil company, so it leveled off
for a while. And so that's why I left in 54 to go with
Geophysical Service, Inc., which is the
originator of Texas Instruments, because they
offered me a job in heading up their new gravity and
magnetic divisions, and that's I could see myself
at the time when I left the Humboldt. It was just
being plateauing for a while. This looked like a
new opportunity to me, a lot of fun. So I went back to
that field, although, again, I was still doing
work for GSI at sea, the way I had been doing for
Humboldt, only this time, again, the exploration
side. People, not people, but a number, several
people have said I'm a charlatan or a genius, one or
the other. And I protest rigorously on neither.
This precipitated by the time, again, I was with TI
in the early 60s when I had a contract with NASA to
figure out what geological and geophysical
experiments should be made when the astronauts
arrived on the moon. And the first guy that called
me, Charlton, was one of the competitors that also
had a proposal and didn't get the contract. And he
said, what do you mean? He said, you start out as a
land geologist and geophysicist, and then you
turn into an oceanographer and go to sea. And now
you're telling people what should be done on the
moon in geology and geophysics. And I said, well,
it's simple, because the fundamentals of geology
and geophysics are the same, whether you happen to
be on planet Earth or on planet water or on planet
moon. Simple as that. And it was interesting to see
that. See, that was in around the early 60s, when
the astronauts did land on the moon,
that they followed out pretty well the things that
Jacqueline Lopek and myself had outlined, with
the help, of course, of about 25 consultants, what
should be done. We also looked for water on the
moon, too. This group that I was involved in and
running at the time. That's even more solemn than
we all know. There's very little water on the moon.
A lot of people had ideas that perhaps there'd be
some sort of a... Oh, hydrate just below the
meteoric dust. All right, this explains, then,
your interest in space in the mid-1960s. Yeah.